List of Terms for PS 1 Final, Fall 2021

 
Pluralism - according to Robert Dahl and Charles Lindblom
“Old” Pluralism
Interest groups, not voters, are central to a responsive government
Institutional fragmentation leads to multiple cross-cutting interest groups that provide multiple points of access into the government
Influence is broadly (but not evenly) distributed
 “New” Pluralism
Problems with old pluralism
Free-rider problem
Unequal resources: class and wealth will play a HUGE role in influence; more than interest
More nuanced understanding
Governments are not entirely responsive to interest groups. Rather, it is split up into sections that look after their own interests.
Recognition of how other factors such as socioeconomic wealth come into play
“Horse-race” Coverage: framing elections as a “horse-race”; more like a competition than on the political stakes or contents.
A way for media to garner more viewership by making politics entertaining
Exacerbates voters’ unknowingness of political ongoings during elections and makes 2 party polarization more extreme; just care about who’s one top between the candidates
retrospective voting: Voting on candidates for re-election based on what they did in previous terms
A way to keep politicians accountable
“Folk Theory of Democracy”: the idea that the voting public supports, elects, and embraces candidates who serve the collective wishes and desires of the people
Christopher H. Achen and Larry M. Bartels
Heuristics: a way for uninformed voters to make decisions (usually based on cues)
Cues
Based on personal knowledge (ex. How is the economy doing?)
Take cues from perceived professional (those following particular issues more closely)
Cues from opinion leaders
Party-bias
Limitations
Cognitive bias 
We are very flawed in out perception of risk 
Prone to motivated reasoning 
Working back to the conclusion we want to reach 
We can’t really ever remain neutral 
Framing 
EX: public opinion polls 
Blind retrospection 
Droubts, shark attacks, how the economy is doing in the last year 
Partisanship 
Citizens are not politicians → emotions and identity 
Diverging sources of information 
Electoral College: states get certains # of electors based on representatives in congress to contribute to 538 electoral votes
President needs 270 votes
Hybrid compromise for presidential election
Direct election only used for the house and later the senate (17th amendment)
Electors are chosen to choose the president
Popular vote is used to guide the decisions of electors but not obligated to do so (point is to limit the power of the masses)
Reinforces two party system: does not allow for political minority to gain traction
Costs of voting
Collective action problems bc each individual vote doesn’t sway much but collectively it does
The actual costs: 
You have to register
Find a polling place 
Take time out of your day 
Psychological 
Who to vote for (heavy informational burden) 
White people have an easier time voting 
“invisible primary”/The Party Decides: when elections are swayed one way through primary nominations; the time period when candidates are sourcing donations and endorsements
Candidates who raise the most money appear the strongest, and thus garner more support later on
Very important stage for runners to establish initial outcomes
free-rider problem (re: interest groups)
just bc you share interest doesn’t mean you actually do anything to materialize it and groups that do tend to be more concentrated interests
Gerrymandering: strategic redrawing of districts to make certain groups gain more political power
Leverages geographic political distribution
Redrawing to allow for one party to gain political control of the region. Splitting up regions by voting lines in order to break up opposite party and allow for one to win during elections
“intense policy demanders”: Interest groups with strong opinions that engage in activism and fight for tangible policy changes
Asymmetric Polarization: unequal polarization between two parties; one side becomes more extreme than the other
Presently, the right is more polarized than the left (bc of right-wing media)
“Tea Party”: a movement in 2009 by conservatives in opposition of Barack Obama’s election
Opposing excessive taxation and “free-handouts” to undeserving people
Social group grew into an actual political party that garners from electoral support
A political party that emerged out of a conservative social movement
The Tea Party social movement was started in 2009 essentially in opposition to the election of President Obama
Specifically, the Tea Party started in protest to “giving public help to ‘subsidize the losers’ mortgages’”
Between 2009 and 2010, the Tea Party grew from a social movement into an actual party, with support growing in actual electoral races
The main ideals of the Tea Party is focused on opposition to perceived federal government “handouts” to “undeserving” groups
Fox News is a specific media outlet that is serving to “mobilizer” the tea party, as well as “define their insular community”two-party
Two-party system: democrats vs republican
Causes people to vote for parties rather than candidates
Concentrated vs. Diffuse Interests: political system where power is widely diffused among many instead of concentrated in the hands of a few
Related to old pluralism in defending multiple cross-cutting interest groups
Social Movement
Right-wing Populism: political ideology of giving power to the people
Anti-elitist, nationalist
Versus left-wing populism, right-wing is okay with large corporations and more stringent immigration policies
McGovern-Fraser Commission: commission to rewrite the Democratic Party’s process for nominating candidates for the primaries
Created after tumultuous 1968 democratic national convention
Produced the binding primary system. 
Replaced the previous convention system. 
Moderated for the Dem party with the addition of superdelegates to the formula of how presidential nominations went down. 
How the “guard rails” for democracy, how parties lose their gatekeeping abilities. 
NRA: National Rifle Association.
In the late 1970’s it became a much more political organization. Gun rights are associated with a central pillar of American freedom. The GOP has become much more focused on gun rights. 
Ideology
Party identification
Newt Gingrich: Uber-conservative figure who pushed the party further to the right. 
1978: Becomes only Republican in Georgia delegation. 
1983: co-founds conservative opportunity society. 
1990: Challenges George H.W. Bush over Taxes, House minority leader michel over leadership style. 
1993: Becomes house minority leader. 
1995: Becomes Speaker. 
1998: Launches impeachment proceedings, electoral setbacks, resigns speakership.
“Minoritarian Rule”: where minorities govern/hold more influence
Happening in congress with rural vs urban
Small states hold equals chairs, so 17% of the population holds majority chairs.
Theses minoriatian advantages can then become entrenched 
Courts 
Gerrymandering 
Disenfranchisement/voting rules 
Policies 
Koch Brothers network: a private system of a few hundred VERY rich donors who fund efforts to make America more conservative
The brothers (Charles G. David H. Koch) made significant contributions to libertarian and conservative think tanks along with donating primarily to Republican Party candidates running for office.  
One of the most influential groups
Motivated Reasoning: Working backwards from the conclusion we want to reach
emotionally biased reasoning to produce justifications or make decisions that are most desired rather than those that accurately reflect the evidence.
Negative (or “Affective”) polarization: Voters motivated by distrust/hatred of other side rather than belief in platform of their party
”Miracle of aggregation”/”Wisdom of Crowds”: even if individual voters make irrational decisions, the decisions of informed voters in collective crowds will cancel out those effects and lead to a group that is relatively rational and makes a democracy run relatively well
Expressive benefits: an type of incentive to join an interest group to express a belief they have
“Democratic Backsliding”: decrease in the quality of democracy
Usually due to systems intended to maintain democracy degrading
“Forbearance”: intentional restraint of power to to respect the spirit of the law
Litmus Test of Authoritarian Behavior
Status quo bias
Racial resentment
“Party in Government”
“Party in Society”
