Market Scoping
Marketing := creating value for customers in order to capture value from them
Market := group of end users with a need and desire/means to fill it, e.g. consoles for gamers, MS Office for workers
Segmentation tradeoff: Fewer segments → more efficient, more segments → more specific; 4 bases of segmentation:
1. Demographic: immutable, e.g. age, gender, income, education, zipcode, company size, industry; “young males in Berkeley”
2. Needs: consumer desires, e.g. overcoming challenges, circumstances, requirements; “need high resolution screens to game”
3. Psychographic: e.g. attitudes, lifestyle, interests, preferences; “fans of gaming culture”
4. Behavioral: e.g. usage intensity/frequency, channel references, category spending; “play 6-8 hours a day”
Customer lifetime value = (Customer Spend * Length of Customer Relationship) - Customer Acquisition Cost
Customer relationship groups				Product-market expansion framework  

BCG growth share matrix

Campaign’s/Stories/Videos
Dove Campaign for Real Beauty - studied >3,00 women in 10 g=countries, sustained campaign featuring real women outside of beauty norms
Steve Jobs - brands are simple, e.g. Apple = “Think Different”
Ford F150 EV - family vehicle powering a home during a blackout
Marketing Planning
Brand relevance: depended on, innovate consistently, inspire customers; e.g. 1) Apple, 2) Spotify, 3) Android, 4) Bose, 5) Disney
Brand equity includes: brand awareness and availability, memorability (slogans, characters, logos, colors, fonts, audio elements are helpful here), perceived relevance and usefulness, customer experience and consistency, brand values and associations
Useful for attracting customers and employees.
The value proposition answers three questions: 1. Who are we? - The capabilities or special expertise we bring to bear. 2. What do we do? - The key aspects of our offering. 3. Why does it matter? - The customer need addressed
Brand positioning
- Relative to competing offerings
- Makes it credible, relevant, and differentiated to its target audience
- Basis for external messaging
“For TARGET, XYZ brand is the CATEGORY/FRAME OF REFERENCE that KEY BENEFIT because it (of course has TABLE STAKES, but) is the only one that has DIFFERENTIATORS.”

Engagement through touchpoints


SWOT analysis
SMART marketing objectives
Specific, Measurable, Aggressive yet, Realistic, Time-bound

Campaign’s/Stories/Videos
CocaCola are experts offering beverages made of various combinations for thirsty consumers everywhere
- Hilltop commercial - people from around the world singing, Coke is the “real thing”
- Pepsi taste test commercial - in blind tests, >50% like Pepsi
- Cosby (Coke) vs. Michael Jackson (Pepsi) - made Coke seem outdated
Coke made a new product to beat Pepsi in taste tests; now Coke is going into new beverage categories
Marketing Implementation
Rules: 1. Lowering the price is always price, not promotion
2. Promotions get the word out, even if it involves a place
Metrics
Measurements can be quantitative (e.g. surveys, data - what people do) or qualitative (e.g. interviews, feedback - why they do it)
Unaided awareness (top of mind): Brands heard of, regardless of use; 
Aided awareness: Brands recognized when shown a list of names/logos
Trial/purchase: Observe path to purchase with shopping carts/coupons, or ask consumers what they consider buying/which they’ve purchased
Repeat purchase/loyalty: Analyze repurchase data, or ask for repeat buyers, what brand they buy most often, and what brands they recommend
Acquisition Conversion = Trial/PurchaseAided Awareness, Retention Conversion = Repeat PurchaseTrial/Purchase
Marketing is not just an expense on the income statement: MROI = CLV - Marketing InvestmentMarketing Investment, prioritize high MROI
Campaign’s/Stories/Videos
Apple Watch 5, “This watch tells time, among other things” - many features, single list price, many channels, advertising
Nike - Dream Crazy commercial - sacrifice for beliefs, 
Baby Dove and the Black Birth Equity Fund - $250k fund for black mothers, collaborations, funded with gifts at Walmart

Market Scoping/Brand Architecture
Aims to optimize the portfolio through greater clarity, efficiency, equity, and growth. Focus on customers. House of brands is less linked than hybrid, which is less linked than branded house.


Companies/Stories/Videos
Facebook created a new logo to distinguish company from app; company spans Instagram, Whatsapp, Oculus, Messenger, etc.
P&G Super Bowl 2020 multi-product brand commercial - aimed to tie together brands, build brand equity
Plestar jointly owned by Volvo and Geelt, makes EV/hybrid vehicles