Always Think Right to Left (ATRTL): Visions can be personal and organizational, providing motivation and alignment; to find your vision, envision a world. A mission (external) is one particular path towards a vision, mediated by values (internal), which are guardrails. UC’s vision of advancing future generations, missions of teaching, research, and public service. Personal > organizational values for commitment (4 box matrix). John Kotter says: “over communicate the vision by a factor of 10”
Visionary leaders orchestrate some vision. 1. Repeat to compete, 2. Sharing matters, 3. Inquiring about and inspiring a vision, leading up and across.
Objectives are vision (why, where), mission (who, what, how), long-term goals (to have, be). Key results are SMART goals (specific, measurable, aggressive, realistic, time-bound), with numbers.
Kouzes and Posner polled people for leadership characteristics, with most common as honest, inspiring, competent, and forward-looking. Two underlying truths: 1. People may disagree about values, but sharing matters more than shared values. 2. Walk the talk (e.g. Wells Fargo failed to walk the talk of trust). The key is to know your people (KYP) and be yourself (BYS). Threats to values and integrity include: 1) tradeoffs, e.g. family vs work, honesty vs pragmatism (org/personal); 2) having too many, 5+ won’t create alignment (org); 3) competition with reality/subconscious fears (personal); Asking about vision and values is the best way to “lead up and across”
History of management: Follows pendulum and arc (there are oscillations, but underlying progress), 1911 – Frederick Taylor: Scientific Management, 1918 - Mary Parker Follett:  A Pioneer, 1960 – Douglas McGregor: Theory X and Theory Y, 1950s-60s – Peter Drucker: Knowledge-workers, Management By Objectives
old CEOs (power held above, focus on leader, extrinsic rewards/punishments, uniformity) vs. new CEOs (shared power, focus on results, intrinsic rewards, diversity)
2010s – John Mackey: Conscious Capitalism, win-win between customer, investor, employee, supplier, community, world, (businesses 1. must find deeper meaning, 2. are part of an ecosystem) 2010s – John Doerr: OKRs, high level Objectives (what), SMART goals for Key Results (how) - benefits of 1. transparency, 2. alignment, 3. engagement
Personality: Emotional intelligence = self awareness (proactive, better decisions, acceptance), self management, empathy, social skill; Goleman says leadership = emotional
Myers Brigg is a theory of personality, not normative (no style is better than others), not about skills, intelligence, character, drive, demographics, egotc., academic prefer OCEAN
Extraversion (active, sociable, talk out ideas) vs. Introversion (reflective, privacy, prefer writing)
Sensing (reality, discrete data, present-oriented) vs. iNtuition (possibility, big picture, future-oriented)
Thinking (cause and effect, objective, tough-minded) vs. Feeling (empathetic, compassionate, tender-hearted)
Judging (schedule, organize, planning) vs. Perceiving (flexible, spontaneous, adaptable)
SJ - guardians, SP - artisans, NF - idealists, NT - rationals; UGBA more NT (lawyers, managers), SJ (gen pop)
Management Styles: from Goleman-Hay: coercive-commanding (demand immediate compliance, crisis management), authoritative-visionary (mobilize towards a new vision), affiliative (harmony, works to heal teams), democratic (consensus, creates buy-in), coaching (encourage performance), pacesetting (set high standards, get quick results), asshole; leading by 2 (LX2), pick a complementary leadership style
Listening: 1. Listening to unlearn assumptions, a) to build a robust picture of reality, b) the less you know, the more you speak, c) people don’t care how much you know until they know how much you care
2. Step-by-step methodology for divergent learning, your mind, cool ideas, warm emotion ,1) quiet your own mind, 2) intend to get full meaning, 3) use open-ending questions, 4) copy & paste to your mental clipboard, 5) peel the onion, 6) try to not know, 7) reflect back for clarity (no “I’ll look stupid/slow things down/make them feel bad”), 8) ask for more (open-ended, divergent), 9) listen to the music, 10) reflect back with empathy
System: = perceived whole with elements that affect each other towards a common purpose, eg. business parts that affect each other. Understand external and internal factors/causes and avoid the silo, when departments do not share information with each other; lessons for studying systems:
1. “Presenting problems” are often deceptive. 2. Don’t be fooled by immediacy in time and space. 3. Step back to see systems in play 4. Ask 40 why’s if necessary 5. Involve every possible component. 6. Get more data!
Diversity is the range of human differences, including but not limited to race, ethnicity, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, age, social class, physical ability or attributes, religious or ethical values system, national origin, and political beliefs 
Inclusion is involvement and empowerment, where the inherent worth and dignity of all people are recognized. An inclusive university promotes and sustains a sense of belonging; it values and practices respect for the talents, beliefs, backgrounds, and ways of living of its members.
Positivity: Gratitude opens social-emotional and cool-rational pipelines; journaling things you are grateful for - 1 top of mind and 1 about you - promotes health and happiness
Positivity ratios: 5.6:1 for high performing teams, 1.8:1 for medium performing teams, 0.36:1 for poor performing teams, 5:1 for successful couples (“Gottman rule”), 3:1 is the pivot (Frederickson)
Great Managers Manage Promises (OKRs), spoken values require action (Do What I Say I will Do). Manage workers adult to adult, a good management session ends in a new promise
Readings  
Personal mastery: central practice involves learning to keep personal vision + clear picture of reality (creates structural tension, which seeks resolution so reality moves closer to vision). Emotional tension = beliefs that we are unworthy or powerless to obtain vision -> see more ET more clearly. Robert Fritz says vision is about “what vision does, not what it is”. PM teaches us to choose: pick results and actions to make into destiny. Personal -> shared vision: build shared meaning (a collective sense of what is important and why).
The Leadership Challenge - Kouzes and Posner: 1. Model the way (clarify values, set the example), 2. Inspire a shared vision (envision the future, enlist others) 3. Challenge the process (search for opportunities, experiment and take risks), 4. Enable others to act (foster collaboration, strengthen others),  5. Encourage the heart (recognize contribution,celebrate the values/victories). Capital one example practicing shared vision
Secret Tesla Master Plan: long term, build affordable family priced cars; Tesla speeds up the move from hydrocarbon → solar electric. Lithium ion cell batteries = not hazardous + landfill safe + recyclable. Power plant emissions = sustainable + environmentally friendly. In short: build sports car → use money to build affordable car → use money to build more affordable car → provide zero emission electric power generation
Musk working 120 hours: showing the team that whatever he does to them, he does worse for himself
Listening underrated: one of most powerful ways to build trust is listening. Ask open ended questions to learn, show respect and empower, and to coach. Create space and time with them. Seek feedback frequently.
Engage on a personal level. Seek to understand their unique goals and passions.
White Privilege: not  just having an upper hand, but simply dominance or comfortability in a neutral sense. Seeks to make white privilege acknowledged and educate its existence. Analogous to a “backpack.”
Inclusion: leadership necessitates inclusion; prevent pre-empted attack from those that are alienated. Inclusion expands and strengthens the whole. Inclusion is personal but also systemic
Business Roundtable: focusing on an economy that serves Americans - delivering value to customers, investing in employees, dealing fairly and ethically with suppliers, supporting communities in which they work, generating long term value for shareholders. Americans deserve an economy that allows success through hard work. Issued by the business roundtable.